776 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 69, NO. 3, JUNE 2022
Permissionless and Permissioned,
Technology-Focused and Business Needs-Driven:
Understanding the Hybrid Opportunity in Blockchain
Through a Case Study of Insolar
Henry M. Kim , Member, IEEE , Hjalmar Turesson , Marek Laskowski, and Amir Fard Bahreini
Abstract —Blockchains can be public, permissionless networks
implementing novel cryptocurrency-based technology features or
permissioned, interorganizational networks championed by indus-
try consortia. Some ventures operationalize a hybrid of these two
network types to enhance adoption of their blockchain platforms
by broadening their base of stakeholders or facilitating interop-
erability between heterogeneous blockchains. In this article, we
synthesize literature and industry writings to identify four hy-
brid blockchain architectures: hybrid blockchain approach, con-
nected hybrid blockchain, interoperable blockchain architecture,
and hard-forked blockchain for enterprise use. We then analyze
these architectures along dimensions of semantic modeling support
between private and public networks, data connectivity between
networks, syntactic interoperability support between networks
with heterogeneous codebases, governance model, and technical
features. We ﬁnd that hybrid blockchain ventures make trade-offs:
support API’s, tools, and customized development so that a code-
base is useful for private and public networks orprovide such sup-
port for interoperation between heterogeneous codebases. We then
conduct a case study of an exemplar for a hybrid blockchain ap-
proach, the startup Insolar. We identify characteristics that have led
Insolar to be idiosyncratically agile and effective in its blockchain
development, which together with our architecture analysis may be
timely and prescriptive as enterprises grow interested in addressing
blockchain hybridity and interoperability.
Index Terms —Blockchain, blockchain interoperability, hybrid
blockchains.
I. I NTRODUCTION
GARTNER [1] believes that by 2023 up to $2 trillion of
goods and services and 30% of world news and video
content will be tracked and authenticated using blockchain
technologies [2], [3]. Last few years have also seen thousands of
ventures focused on developing blockchain-related technology
Manuscript received July 1, 2019; revised December 13, 2019 and April
6, 2020; accepted May 21, 2020. Date of publication July 9, 2020; date of
current version February 21, 2022. Review of this manuscript was arranged by
Department Editor K.-K. R. Choo. (Corresponding author: Henry M. Kim.)
Henry M. Kim, Hjalmar Turesson, and Marek Laskowski are with the Schulich
School of Business, York University, Toronto, ON M3J 1P3, Canada, and
also with the INSOLAR, 6312 Zug, Switzerland (e-mail: hmkim@yorku.ca;
hturesson@schulich.yorku.ca; marlas@yorku.ca).
Amir Fard Bahreini is with the Sauder School of Business, Univer-
sity of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada (e-mail:
amir.fard@sauder.ubc.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this article are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TEM.2020.3003565[4]. First was the Bitcoin network, a peer-to-peer payment
system underpinned by a blockchain that represents, stores,
and cryptographically secures data [3]. Blockchain’s usefulness
stems from a novel idea: replace trust in third parties by allowing
decentralized users to verify the correctness of all transactions
[5], [6].
Transparency and user self-reliance upon technology to
leverage this transparency to verify and audit are core to Bit-
coin and other such public blockchain networks that reward
cryptocurrencies to incentivize distributed stakeholders to op-
erate the network. Alternatively, enterprises using blockchain to
trace goods, services, and video content are developing private
networks for theirs and their stakeholders’ business needs. The
objective of this article is to conduct research where these two
perspectives on blockchain overlap: To that end, we survey
relevant literature, propose a conceptual framework, study a
real-life case, and present ﬁndings and insights regarding the
notion of hybrid blockchains.
There is a technology-focused, cryptocurrency perspective of
early blockchain adopters and startups, and a business needs-
driven perspective symbolizing corporate interest in blockchain.
Though not mutually exclusive, there are substantial differences
between the two in, for example, software and capability matu-
rity [7]–[9]. Nevertheless, we posit that there is an opportunity
in leveraging a hybrid of the two perspectives. Why wouldn’t
a startup take advantage of an opportunity to raise money by
issuing cryptocurrencies—if that opportunity is there—to fund
the building of a technologically novel blockchain-based net-
work? Among the numerous startups that raised money this way,
this article focuses on Insolar, an 80-person Swiss blockchain
company, which raised $42 million in late 2017 to build their
platform. Moreover, why wouldn’t that startup be drawn to
realize real-world revenues by also helping to develop private
networks for enterprise customers’ business needs? Insolar is
doing both as it operates a cryptocurrency-based public network
and helps develop private networks for enterprise customers.
Therefore, Insolar is a good case study context to characterize
what the opportunity in hybridization of public and private
network entails. To that end, we build upon extant literature
and detail a multimethod case study of Insolar. The objectives
and contributions of our article are as follows:
0018-9391 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: York University. Downloaded on August 12,2024 at 01:50:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KIM et al. : PERMISSIONLESS AND PERMISSIONED, TECHNOLOGY-FOCUSED AND BUSINESS NEEDS-DRIVEN 777
1) We characterize the notion of a hybrid blockchain that
integrates aspects of both public, permissionless as well as
private, permissioned blockchains. We show that though
such characterizations have been addressed at a lower,
technical level [10], [11], to the best of our knowledge, this
article is one of the ﬁrst to explore more fully at different
levels of focus.
2) We draw from public and privileged data from Insolar,
a real-life startup charting an extemporaneous hybrid
blockchain approach. We stress the uniqueness of such
access as contributory. With the nascence of blockchain
research, academically focused case studies of blockchain
ventures are not common. Additionally, very few other
than Insolar can lay claim to be taking a hybrid approach.
3) As the blockchain space matures, we posit that the fuller
characterization of hybrid blockchain architectures that
we present in this article will provide a contributory guid-
ance to researchers and practitioners. For researchers, our
case study can provide insight and basis of comparison for
hybrid blockchain studies in the future, and for theorizing
in the long term. For managers, we provide simple frame-
works for easy referencing, and the Insolar case is rooted
in a relatable, real-life narrative.
4) A speciﬁc and prescriptive contributing guidance is this:
theorizing opportunities and management insights to ad-
dress the blockchain interoperability problem.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. In the next
section, we provide background and a survey of literature related
to the concept of hybrid blockchains. In Section III, we provide
our multimethod case study methodology. In Section IV, we
analyze and discuss models of benchmarks of hybrid blockchain
architectures, and Insolar’s blockchain development process.
Finally, Section V concludes the article.
II. B ACKGROUND AND LITERATURE REVIEW
A. Background
Bitcoin is the prime example of a blockchain-based network
open to the public in which the user does not need special
permission to participate. Another example of such a public,
permissionless blockchain is Ethereum [12], [13], a network
that generalizes capabilities beyond payments to a programming
environment for developing distributed applications, aka smart
contracts. Central to the functioning of public, permissionless
blockchain networks are cryptocurrencies , which are digital
tokens of value (digital currencies ) that use crypto graphical
features of blockchains associated with them to ensure that
they can be exchanged fairly even without an intermediary. For
instance, bitcoins can be sent from one digital wallet to another
on the namesake network; not only can ethers also be sent but
Ethereum requires ethers to be spent on a per-use basis to execute
smart contracts. Bitcoin and Ethereum network users and devel-
opers as well as other early adopters of blockchain embraced a
revolutionary, cypherpunk1near-faith in their technology [14].
1It is a portmanteau of cipher and cyberpunk, and refers to an activist or
advocate who believes that cryptography-based technologies that affect security
and privacy can enable meaningful and social and political change.This early adopter perspective was imbued by an emphasis
on cryptocurrency. Just as ﬁat currencies are traded on forex
exchanges, ethers and bitcoins trade on cryptoexchanges. Many
early blockchain adopters were startups that used payment and
digital money exchange features of early platforms—usually
Ethereum—to crowdfund their own ventures through a mecha-
nism called initial coin offerings (ICOs) [15]. The coin offered
was the venture’s cryptocurrency. For instance, on December 27,
2017, Insolar (then called INS Ecosystem) promised to build
a blockchain platform for decentralized grocery delivery and
conducted an ICO for its INS coins that resulted in $42 million
in proceeds2[16]. An avalanche of similar ICOs were launched
as interest in Bitcoin and Ethereum exploded. It is estimated
that $6.2 billion was raised in total in ICO funding in 2017,
and $7.8 billion in 2018 [17]. Speculators would buy into a
cryptocurrency only to sell it for multiples of the original price
a few weeks or even just days later. The rational explanation
for this is that if a network becomes popular its cryptocurrency
would be in higher demand and hence appreciate in value in the
same way that a ﬁat currency (e.g., US Dollar) appreciates as
forex investors want to sell other currencies to buy it. However,
the inﬂated appreciation of cryptocurrency prices can only be
explained as a true speculative bubble, which popped and re-
sulted in 2018’s “crypto winter”3where bitcoin for instance lost
85% of its value. For some of these cryptocurrencies, prices may
now represent a fair value of future demand for their networks.
Beyond absolute conviction in technology and a “crypto”
emphasis, the perspective of early blockchain adopters can
additionally be described as worldwide, open, and decentralized.
Starting in 2014, enterprises with a different perspective formed
the R3 and Hyperledger consortia, which represent leaders of
enterprise blockchain initiatives [18]–[20]. Hyperledger is a
Linux Foundation-supported open source project to develop
tools and expertise for enterprises and governments to develop
their own blockchains. R3 brought together ﬁnancial institu-
tions interested in investigating how blockchain technologies
could make heavily intermediated, interorganizational business
processes more efﬁcient. Fabric represents Hyperledger’s cor-
nerstone platform [21]; Corda is an R3 cornerstone [20]. Both
are platforms for developing permissioned, private, “enterprise
grade” blockchains that are accessible only to qualiﬁed members
of a business network.
In the case of Insolar, it eventually broadened its scope and
committed to develop a more general-purpose public, permis-
sionless platform. In early 2020, the platform’s cryptocurrency,
XNS coins, was exchanged by users to pay fees to providers of
apps and other on-the-platform services on the Insolar MainNet.
2Investors executed a smart contract on Ethereum that traded in their ethers
for INSs. A total of 60 000 ethers valued at $42.5 million were traded in by
investors to purchase 30 million INSs at an average value of $1.42 per INS or
0.002 ethers per INS. Investors then held INSs in their digital wallets [8]. On
January 12, 2018, INS started trading on the open market. That is, INSs were
registered with cryptoexchanges who matched buyers and sellers exchanging
INSs for ethers into their digital wallets. According to the de facto historical
reference site, coinmarketcap.com, for INS Ecosystem, with each trade volume
and price serving as a signal for subsequent bullish trades, INSs closed their ﬁrst
day at trading at $4.93 or 0.00549 ethers. ICO investors in INSs were rewarded
with a 247% gain in dollars or 175% gain in terms of ethers.
3Refers to a winter for crypto prices, and is a common term used in the crypto
community to describe the steep decline in cryptocurrency prices.
Authorized licensed use limited to: York University. Downloaded on August 12,2024 at 01:50:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
778 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 69, NO. 3, JUNE 2022
Insolar also made the choice to provide its blockchain codebase
and custom development support to help develop private, per-
missioned blockchains for enterprises [22]. This decision was id-
iosyncratic. The norm has been for startups to perform an ICO on
Ethereum, build an alternative public, permissionless blockchain
where their cryptocurrencies could be used, and commit to
develop some applications that use the platform, but certainly
not commit so far as to custom-develop private, permissioned
networks [23], [24]. Insolar thus embraced a hybridization of two
perspectives: technology-focused and business needs-driven;
public, permissionless and private, permissioned; provider of
platform, applications, andcustom development services; crypto
andcorporate.
What ought to make this interesting to practitioners and
researchers is the potential contribution to address an important
knowledge gap [25, p. 4]:
As enterprises explore blockchain solutions, they are increasingly
concerned about the proliferation of blockchains, how blockchain
applications will connect with each other and with legacy systems,
and they fear getting locked into solutions too early. In short,
enterprises are concerned about blockchain interoperability …N o t
surprisingly, our investigation has revealed many ideas for answering
the research question, but thus far interoperability projects have
produced few production-ready solutions. One thing is clear: we
see a disconnect between top-down business concerns about speciﬁc
ecosystems/applications, and bottom-up technical concerns about
general blockchain interoperability.
Insolar did not set out to solve the blockchain interoperability
problem; they evolved their own hybrid approach. It just so
happens that this approach entails addressing both top-down
business and bottom-up technical blockchain concerns, and
hence may offer insights to address the blockchain interoper-
ability disconnect. After all, hybrid blockchain architectures
[9] and blockchain interoperability are both motivated from the
heterogeneity inherent in decentralized systems [26].
B. Literature Review: Hybrid Blockchain
There is no shortage of descriptions in gray literature4for
concepts like sidechains [28], [29], hard and soft forks [30],
[31], and interoperability [32], [33] that are related to notions of
hybrid blockchains [34], [35]. Below we offer characterizations
from academic literature that is at least more restrictive. Crypto-
graphic timestamping of hashed private data onto a decentralized
public network [36] is at the root of this restrictive deﬁnition
[37]:
Firstly, hybrid blockchain consists of the public blockchain (that all
participants are a part of) and a private network (also referred to as
a permissioned network) that restricts participation to those invited
by a centralised body. Secondly, this private network generates the
record (hash) of transactions which is stored and veriﬁed on the public
blockchain.
The second part offers a bounded deﬁnition of a sidechain with
the caveat that the sidechain does not need to be private [38].
A related concept is that of a hard fork wherein a blockchain’s
4Which are documents and reports outside of traditional commercial and
academic publishing channels [27].global state is frozen, and its codebase is copied and promptly
modiﬁed, effectively creating a new blockchain that has limited
or no compatibility to the parent blockchain. Soft forks on the
other hand are different states of the same blockchain that coexist
at a given point in time and are eventually5reconciled [13], [39].
There exists a deﬁnition of blockchain interoperability from
a standards body, US’s National Institute of Standards and
Technology [40, p. 50]:
An interoperable blockchain architecture is a composition of distin-
guishable blockchain systems, each representing a unique distributed
data ledger, where atomic transaction execution may span multiple
heterogeneous blockchain systems, and where data recorded in one
blockchain is reachable, veriﬁable and referenceable by another
possibly foreign transaction in a semantically comparable manner.
There have been many efforts at examining data interoperabil-
ity [41], [42], and in Fig. 1 we augment one reference scheme
from the semantic Web [43] with our blockchain context.
For different blockchains like Ethereum and EOS to interoper-
ate, syntactic layer constructs [32] such as relays,6IBC protocol7
elements, and atomic swaps8between them must be used.
Semantic Web applications make a bundle of design choices
like “should the application allow synchronous or asynchronous
transfer of data?” for the structure layer. Comparable choices in
the blockchain context like “permissioned vs. permission-less”
bundled together constitute the design of a distinct blockchain
network like Ethereum. In the blockchain context, the semantic
layer constitutes the data model for a smart contract. In a hybrid
network architecture, the data model for, say an agriculture
supply chain, for a private network should be useable in the
public network if it is meant for use by the agriculture supply
chain.
We then can provide the following as key factors in charac-
terizing hybrid blockchain ventures.
1) The venture’s codebase supports developing public and
private blockchains. Here, we enforce a restrictive char-
acterization of “support” to mean that the operator of the
public network provides API’s, tools, or even programmer
person-hours of customized support to develop, operate,
and semantically model private networks.
2) The venture supports data connectivity to various extents
from simplistic, like support for recording private network
hashes onto the public network, to more sophisticated
data reachability, veriﬁability, and referencing required for
atomic transaction execution across blockchains. That is,
how comprehensive is the syntactic layer for the venture?
3) The venture supports interoperability across heteroge-
neous networks that have differing codebases and pro-
tocols. Here, “support” means providing API’s, tools, or
5Strictly, they don’t have to be reconciled as soft forks can be backwards
compatible. However, most blockchains do reconcile soft forks.
6“Relays allow chains to verify events that have taken place in other chains …
The best example of relay used in blockchain is BTC relay. The BTC relay on
Ethereum can read the Bitcoin chain” [32].
7This is a protocol/standard to facilitate data interoperation between hetero-
geneous blockchain networks proposed by Cosmos.
8This enables “swapping” an amount of one cryptocurrency for an equivalent
amount of another cryptocurrency in a peer-to-peer way.
Authorized licensed use limited to: York University. Downloaded on August 12,2024 at 01:50:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KIM et al. : PERMISSIONLESS AND PERMISSIONED, TECHNOLOGY-FOCUSED AND BUSINESS NEEDS-DRIVEN 779
Fig. 1. Layers for data interoperability.
even programmer person-hours of customized support
to enable syntactic interoperability across heterogeneous
blockchains.
Below, we classify Insolar and other venture types relative to
these factors. On a grid that maps extent of support for semantic
modeling between private and public networks vs. extent of
support for syntactic interoperability between heterogeneous
networks, to the best of our knowledge, only some cells can
be populated and most blockchains do not offer either of these
supports. We name those types that appear in this grid as hybrid
blockchain approach ,connected hybrid blockchain ,interoper-
able blockchain architecture , and hard forked blockchain for
enterprise use . We further characterize these types by the extent
of data connectivity.
An interoperable blockchain architecture would support a
variety of data operations and connections between heteroge-
neous blockchains but would not necessarily commit to a design
needed to support both private and public blockchains. A true
“connected” hybrid blockchain would commit fully to support-
ing private and public blockchains and data operations and
connectivity between them, but under a homogeneous codebase.
Insolar exempliﬁes a hybrid approach in which the codebase
supports private and public blockchains but there is no commit-
ment to interoperability between the two types. Last, we consider
hard forked blockchains, but limit the scope to those that forked
off of Ethereum for more enterprise use. Because of the tether
to the original Ethereum codebase, there is likely very limited
interoperability, but it would not be much as successive versions
of Ethereum’s or their codebase decouple the link. We do not
consider “pure” platforms for private networks like Fabric and
Corda because they were never tethered to a public network.
Next, we describe our research methodology, which entails in
part analysis and benchmarking of these venture types.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
With no prior theory that can guide our methodology toward
demonstrating contributions, we use an interpretive approach
to conduct our case study [44], [45]. This method is useful inunderstanding novel phenomena requiring future exploration of
reality [46]. In this section, we reintroduce our case study sub-
ject, Insolar, and discuss our data collection methods comprised
of semistructured interviews and document analysis.
A. Study Site
Insolar’s platform was to be a decentralized, blockchain-
based network for delivering groceries direct to consumers [47].
Platform users would have paid for their groceries in Insolar’s
INSs. Like all cryptocurrencies, however, INS value sank with
crypto winter, though this decrease was in-line with others. As
of late 2019,9INS at $0.186 per INS ranks #98 in popularity
among cryptocurrencies with an average daily trading volume
of over $13 million at a market cap of $6 million. INS World
eventually branded as Insolar to focus on developing a general,
enterprise-grade platform. It is now an 80-personal international
ﬁrm headquartered in Switzerland with a stated mission is to
“transform the way the world does business by building the
best open-source blockchain platform, applications, and tools”
[48]. Smaller enterprises and individuals can use its public,
permissionless MainNet—to be launched in early 2020 with
XNS coins that convert INS’s 1:1—or larger enterprises can
leverage Insolar’s blockchain codebase and custom development
support to develop permissioned blockchains for their business
networks. Currently, Insolar is involved in projects in renewable
energy, supply chain management, and mining and natural re-
sources. Notably, Gartner recognizes it as one of a minority of
crypto-startups to work on real-life enterprise use cases; that is,
of the thousands of ICO’s, only about 30 including Insolar are
deemed worthy for inclusion into Gartner’s global blockchain
platform landscape [49].
B. Data Collection
We collect data via two avenues: 1) semistructured interviews
and 2) document analysis (gray literature and proprietary doc-
uments). Using this multimethod approach, we aim to reduce
9According to the de facto standard cryptocurrency reporting site,
Coinmarketcap.com, November 18, 2019.
Authorized licensed use limited to: York University. Downloaded on August 12,2024 at 01:50:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
780 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 69, NO. 3, JUNE 2022
TABLE I
INSOLAR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION IN INCREASING LEVEL OF DETAIL
subjectivity that may result from using a single data collection
method and get closer to triangulation of results [46].
1) Document Analysis: We use document analysis as the ﬁrst
data collection method in our article. Incorporating gray litera-
ture on Insolar and others, as well proprietary Insolar data, this
method enables us to gain a further understanding about hybrid
blockchain architectures in general and Insolar’s approach more
speciﬁcally. Table I details sources of our document analysis.
2) Semistructured Interviews: Our second data collection
method comprised of a series of monthly semistructured inter-
views over a six-month span between January and June 2019.
Our interview pool comprised of ten managers at Insolar. The
interviews lasted between 30 and 90 min. These terms were
negotiated to give reasonable access to managers with English-
proﬁciency who together comprise a comprehensive view of
the company. These were conference calls conducted in English
that entailed interviewing one or usually more Insolar person-
nel. In the early months of this endeavor, the interviews were
prompted by open-ended questions. The initial objectives were
to collect data to better understand Insolar from facets ranging
from its history, management objectives, to blockchain technical
features. Later, we focused on understanding their blockchain
development process. The complete list of questions can be
found in the Appendix. Given the evolution of our objectives,
the negotiated terms including not having access to lower level
employees seemed quite reasonable. Employees in the following
roles were interviewed at least once over this period, though theones in technical management roles were interviewed multiple
times: Founder and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer; Founder and Chief
Sales Ofﬁcer (CSO); Founder and Chief Operating Ofﬁcer;
Chief Technology Ofﬁcer; Chief Architect; Head of Develop-
ment Center; Chief Product Ofﬁcer (CPO); Head of Innovation;
Head of Public Relations; Enterprise Project Director.
Additionally, in full disclosure, three of the authors have
afﬁliations with Insolar as research fellows with primary ap-
pointments elsewhere.10
C. Data Analysis
1) Analysis Procedure: We assess our raw data under two
models: 1) benchmark model of different hybrid blockchain
ventures and 2) Insolar’s blockchain development model. Using
these models, we conduct a more holistic assessment of Insolar’s
hybrid blockchain approach.
2) Benchmarks: Benchmarking is an essential part of tra-
ditional software engineering [53], [54]. Benchmarks provide
standard measurements that allow for comparisons of systems.
However, there is quite a shortage of benchmark studies of
blockchain platforms. From our review of the literature, we
could only ﬁnd third-party performance evaluation for a few
10Nevertheless, we declare there is neither conﬂict of interest nor breach in
objectivity as we have not explicitly contributed to the intellectual property
of Insolar platform and our involvement in the company is, by contractual
agreement, arms-length, casual, and focused on academic dissemination.
Authorized licensed use limited to: York University. Downloaded on August 12,2024 at 01:50:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KIM et al. : PERMISSIONLESS AND PERMISSIONED, TECHNOLOGY-FOCUSED AND BUSINESS NEEDS-DRIVEN 781
platforms; the rest (in the cases where any data at all could
be found) are self-reported. Dinh and colleagues introduce
BLOCKBENCH, a benchmarking tool for private blockchains,
and perform benchmarks on private versions of Ethereum, Parity,
and Hyperledger [55]. Further performance analysis of Hyper-
ledger fabric is done by [56], [57]. Xu and colleagues report a
performance analysis of EOS [23] and Baliga et al. [58] provide a
performance evaluation of Quorum. Given few such studies, we
also draw on less academic sources such as self-reports, block
explorers, and inference from source code. Compounding the
paucity of data, benchmarking in the blockchain space also lacks
standards. In an attempt to address this, the Hyperledger perfor-
mance and scale working group [53] have produced a technical
report with the purpose of deﬁning terms and key metrics that
should be used when evaluating blockchain performance. To the
extent possible here, we follow their deﬁnitions and metrics.
3) Ventures in Our Benchmark Models: In Table II, we
have selected ﬁve exemplar ventures representative of hybrid
blockchain types outlined in Fig. 2.
4) Metrics for Benchmarking Hybrid Blockchain Ventures: To
the best of our knowledge, there are no deﬁnitive set of metrics
against which to benchmark these hybrid blockchain ventures.
Hardjono et al. [65] do provide design principles for blockchain
interoperability that include speciﬁc technical architectural met-
rics useable for characterizing hybrid blockchain architectures
that we parse as follows.
1) Degrees of permissionability. The measures that have been
introduced to characterize hybrid blockchain architectures
apply here: support for public and private blockchains, ex-
tent of data interoperation, and support for heterogeneous
blockchains.
2) Speed of conﬁrmation. This is their description: “The
speed (or “throughput”) of a blockchain system refers
to the conﬁrmation speed, based on the population size
of the participating nodes and other factors” [65]. We
disambiguate this to three separate, concrete measures:
transaction throughput, and transaction latency and ﬁnal-
ity, and network size.
3) Strength of consensus. The corresponding objective mea-
sure is the type of consensus protocol.
4) Degrees of anonymity. The public/private and consensus
mechanism measures address this metric.11
5) Cybersecurity and assurance levels of nodes. Data re-
quired to measure for this subjective metric would require
access to ventures or experimentation that is beyond the
scope of this article.12
11This is that description for this metric from [65]: “There are at least two (2)
degrees of anonymity that is relevant to blockchain systems. The ﬁrst pertains
to the anonymity of end-users (i.e., identity-anonymity) and the second is the
anonymity of the nodes participating in processing transactions (e.g., nodes
participating in a given consensus instance). Combinations are possible, such
as where a permissioned system may require all consensus nodes to be strongly
authenticated and identiﬁed, but allows for end-users to remain permissionless
(and even unidentiﬁed/unauthenticated).”
12This is that description for this metric from [65]: “The robustness of a
blockchain system consisting of a peer-to-peer network of nodes is largely
affected by the security of the nodes that make-up the network. If nodes are
easily compromised directly (e.g. hacks) or via indirect means (e.g., dormant
viruses), the utility of the blockchain system degrades considerably.”6) Governance model. The governance model outlined below
from [66] is more concrete.13
An important stakeholder for most public blockchains is a
not-for-proﬁt foundation whose members share responsibility
for funding continuous development and maintenance of the
network as well as providing input for decision-making body
[67].
A blockchain foundation’s governance model can be char-
acterized according to its schemes for [66]14the following
conditions:
1) decision-making, such as for voting rules and terms of
membership;
2) funding mechanism, which includes some combination
of ICO’s, donations, taxation, and patron organization
contributions;
3) incentives structure that entails identiﬁcation of stake-
holder types and incentives speciﬁc to each type.
These metrics are used to analyze these ventures in the next
section.
IV . A NALYSIS OF MODELS
A. Benchmarking Model of Hybrid Blockchain Ventures
1) Benchmark Model. Governance: Our benchmarking is
shown in Table III. Aergo and Insolar are ICO funded ventures
developing public MainNet. They use their codebases to develop
private networks for enterprises. Insolar does not commit to
connect the two types but takes responsibility for both; Aergo
commits to help with connectivity but the responsibility of
building private networks as sidechains lies with Aergo’s joint
venture partner, Blocko. The risk is that unless maintained in a
coordinated way Aergo’s MainNet and private sidechains may
lose their connections. Developing private blockchains requires
extensive business needs-driven customization of the codebase
and semantic modeling. Aergo/Blocko and Insolar provide this
support.
Quorum provides a blockchain codebase that their customers
can use, which may entail paying for apps or custom develop-
ment fees to JP Morgan. VeChain commits to operating a public
network useful for enterprise networks. To satisfy enterprise-
grade requirements on factors such as security and reliability,
it effectively operates a blockchain-as-a-service which means
that unlike Aergo and Insolar who look for other stakeholders
to provide needed resources VeChain has to commit more of its
telecomm, CPU, and storage capabilities. Cosmos only commits
to providing API’s and apps to facilitate syntactic connectivity
between heterogeneous networks. It does not commit resources
13This is that description for this metric from [65]: “The term ‘governance’ in
the context of blockchain systems typically is used to refer to the combination of
1) the human-driven policies for the community of participants, 2) the rules of
operations that are encoded within the blockchain software and hardware fabric
itself, and 3) the intended application of the blockchain, which is often expressed
as the ‘smart contracts’.”
14There is a scheme for which data collection is beyond the scope of this
article: A blockchain foundation’s governance model can be characterized ac-
cording its schemes for [61]: “Blockchain and stakeholder security and privacy.
In Insolar’s case, speciﬁcs of their platform design handle security and privacy
for the blockchain but policies for stakeholders have not been established.”
Authorized licensed use limited to: York University. Downloaded on August 12,2024 at 01:50:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
782 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 69, NO. 3, JUNE 2022
TABLE II
EXEMPLAR VENTURES FOR BENCHMARKING HYBRID BLOCKCHAIN ARCHITECTURES
15Coinmarketcap.com, November 18, 2019.
16Coinmarketcap.com, November 18, 2019.
Authorized licensed use limited to: York University. Downloaded on August 12,2024 at 01:50:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KIM et al. : PERMISSIONLESS AND PERMISSIONED, TECHNOLOGY-FOCUSED AND BUSINESS NEEDS-DRIVEN 783
Fig. 2. Classifying the hybrid blockchain architecture space.
for its blockchain architecture to the same extent nor take full re-
sponsibility for custom development, maintenance, or semantic
modeling. It has to however deliver on a capability , interoper-
ability, that is acknowledged to be difﬁcult [25]. Finally, all but
Quorum (which doesn’t have coins) appear to act upon their
responsibility to their coin holders, even though not obligated to
by regulation [15].
2) Benchmark Model. Key Hybrid Characteristics: See Ta-
ble IV .
3) Benchmark Model. Technical Features: On a permission-
less blockchain, anyone can submit transactions and its state is
observable to all. Users can also seek to participate in achieving
consensus. In contrast, only invited participants can use and
observe a private blockchain where participation in achieving
consensus is gated by one or more authorities [77]. Consensus
protocols are programmatic rules that automate reaching con-
sensus on transactions to be immutably recorded onto the next
block of the blockchain. Of the two widely adopted classes of
consensus protocols, Nakamoto is more appropriate for permis-
sionless chains; Classical Byzantine Fault Tolerant (BFT), for
permissioned chains.
Nakamoto consensus [5], which encompasses popular proof-
of-work and traditional proof-of-stake mechanisms, scales well
and provides security in big networks with a large and unknown
number of participants but provides only a low transaction
throughput (rate at which valid transactions are committed onto
a block, expressed as transactions per second) and does not
guarantee that consensus can be reached to ﬁnalize committing
all valid transactions onto a block (i.e., transaction ﬁnality is
probabilistic). Classical BFT protocols [78] allow for higher
throughput, short transaction latency (time from the commit-
ment of a transaction until it cannot be reversed), and absolute(nonprobabilistic) transaction ﬁnality, but scales poorly to larger
networks.
By these descriptions,Table V shows that though Aergo
and Cosmos are public, permissionless networks, their bench-
mark measures on technical features are characteristic of pri-
vate networks. Benchmark measures for Quorum and VeChain
clearly reﬂect private (using Classical BFT) and public (using
Nakamoto) characteristics, respectively, as they should.
There are two layers of consensus in Insolar [79]: a network
consensus and business (dynamic) consensus. Network con-
sensus ensures a consistent global state and safeguards against
malicious nodes. Dynamic consensus enables groups of nodes
to process transactions in parallel, such that there can be nu-
merous small-scale consensuses achieved simultaneously in a
large-scale network. Hence, enterprise users who form virtual
subnetworks over the MainNet can efﬁciently transact with busi-
ness partners on the subnetwork. These consensus mechanisms
also represent enterprise-grade facets to the Insolar codebase
customizable by non-MainNet, private network customers.
Hence, Insolar MainNet exhibits high throughput and low
latency time benchmarks characteristic of private networks yet
supports large network sizes characteristic of public networks.
Network size here reﬂects number of nodes participating in
consensus-reaching and validation of transactions [53]. More
independent nodes are desirable since that provides robustness
and security. However, increasing the number of nodes often
also negatively impacts throughput and latency (speed). As a
public network that supports few validating nodes, Aergo may
trade-off security for speed. As would be expected, Quorum
supports fewer validating nodes; VeChain, many. Like Insolar,
Cosmos supports hundreds of validating nodes without neces-
sarily sacriﬁcing speed.
Authorized licensed use limited to: York University. Downloaded on August 12,2024 at 01:50:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
784 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 69, NO. 3, JUNE 2022
TABLE III
BENCHMARK MODEL FOR HYBRID BLOCKCHAIN VENTURES —G OVERNANCE
17https://xangle.io/project/home/AERGO/dashboard
18https://xangle.io/project/home/VET/dashboard
19Insolar’s long-term plan for its foundation, as well as those of the foundations of Cosmos, Aergo, and VeChain, is to have other sponsors as well.
20Ibid, footnote Error! Bookmark not deﬁned .
21The last part of the transformation from INS ecosystem to Insolar requires porting INSs that are currently stored within Ethereum to newly minted XNS c oins that
can be stored and used in the Insolar MainNet. The promise of this porting is not uncommon; most ICO ventures promise to invest ICO funds to develop their own
platforms. Insolar has been able to progress far enough to do this. XNS is more than just a 1:1 rebrand of INS. XNS serves as a true cryptocurrency of the Ma inNet
serving as means to pay fees and collect revenues. XNS holders can also earn staking fees. Staking entails a participant posting a bond in order to take p art in a network
activity. The participant may forfeit the bond if they are judged to be a "bad actor" by other participants. Staking ensures that participants have "sk in in the game" and are
invested in network success [70]. Additional stakeholders for Insolar MainNet include individual and enterprise users, application service provi ders, and infrastructure
service providers.
4) Discussion: It is helpful to understand hybrid blockchain
architectures in terms of trade-offs. Or, why there is no ven-
ture with a codebase, custom support, and semantic modeling
for both public and private networks, andfully supports interop-
eration between these two types, andfacilitates syntactic inter-
operation between blockchains with heterogeneous codebases.
1) Insolar, as an exemplar for a hybrid blockchain approach,
developed a two-level consensus mechanism that provides
characteristics of Nakamoto and Classical BFT schemes,
enabling it to show favorable benchmark measures acrossall technical features.27The implication is that Insolar’s
codebase is ﬂexible enough for building both public
(MainNet) and private blockchains. Moreover, Insolar
takes responsibility not only for operating the MainNet
but also going so far as providing custom development
and semantic modeling services for its customers to build
their own private blockchains. All this would take a lot
27There is Network Globula Protocol for <1000 node network (a globula),
and an Interglobula Protocol, for ∼100 globulas.
Authorized licensed use limited to: York University. Downloaded on August 12,2024 at 01:50:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KIM et al. : PERMISSIONLESS AND PERMISSIONED, TECHNOLOGY-FOCUSED AND BUSINESS NEEDS-DRIVEN 785
TABLE IV
BENCHMARK MODEL FOR HYBRID BLOCKCHAIN VENTURES —K EYHYBRID CHARACTERISTICS
TABLE V
BENCHMARK MODEL FOR HYBRID BLOCKCHAIN VENTURES —T ECHNICAL FEATURES
22Self-report; https://www.vechain.org/technology
23Insolar internal documentation.
24Assuming 12 blocks until a transaction is irreversible.
25Insolar internal documentation.
26Insolar internal documentation.
of resources. Insolar’s trade-off is that it does not commit
additional development resources to enable private net-
works to connect to its MainNet nor the concomitant
resources required to maintain continued connectivitybetween MainNet and private blockchains as these asyn-
chronously evolve.
2) Aergo, as an exemplar for a connected hybrid blockchain,
developed a public MainNet that can interoperate with
Authorized licensed use limited to: York University. Downloaded on August 12,2024 at 01:50:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
786 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 69, NO. 3, JUNE 2022
private sidechains developed using a common codebase.
Although its MainNet is ostensibly a public network,
Aergo’s benchmarks show high throughput and low la-
tency measures characteristic of Classical BFT consensus
private networks. These measures indicate a codebase
customized to support private and public blockchain de-
velopment. Moreover, rather than expending its own re-
sources, it partnered with Blocko, which provides custom
development and semantic modeling services to build
private sidechains. However, Aergo’s design does not
support large number of validating nodes, making the
public network more vulnerable to breaches by colluding
validating nodes. Moreover, it had to cede responsibility
for private networks to Blocko, which may make it difﬁcult
to maintain connectivity between these networks and the
MainNet.
3) For Quorum and VeChain, as exemplars for enterprise
blockchains using private-only and public-only networks,
respectively, the trade-off is simply that they do not re-
ally commit to a hybrid blockchain architecture. They
are large ventures so they may be able to let the hybrid
blockchain space mature before committing their focus
there.
4) Cosmos, as an exemplar for interoperable blockchain
architectures, is a leader in that space. Its benchmarks
show measures characteristic of Classical BFT consensus
private blockchains, yet, it supports numerous validating
nodes that mitigate collusion-based security breaches.
Cosmos does not commit special support to develop se-
mantic models for private blockchains. Operating a hub
that connects to heterogeneous chains and helps them
interoperate is difﬁcult. Technically, Cosmos may need to
commit resources to go beyond syntactic interoperability
to develop rich semantic interoperability capability and
help with custom development for enterprises’ private
blockchains.
Next, we take a deeper look at Insolar’s hybrid blockchain
approach.
B. Insolar’s Blockchain Development Model
1) Development Foci: Insolar’s initial vertical orientation in
groceries naturally entailed a business-oriented, use case focus.
When it repositioned as a general platform, Insolar shifted to a
more technology focus. According to their CSO:
We already founded and developed a very successful online grocery
startup in Eastern Europe. And we thought that we could build a
blockchain platform for our business. We realized after the ICO that
our vision should be much broader. At that point, we made a decision
we are proud of. We could have gotten faster time to market by just
building our platform off of Ethereum, but our technical staff told us
that would hamstring us in the future in getting enterprise customers.
We could have also developed something from scratch fairly quickly
that was maybe just okay but the founders and senior managers, we
all have very good reputations that we didn’t want to damage.
Fortuitously, this business transition was a lot less disruptive
than it could have been. Insolar was able to fairly quickly spec
out a blockchain version of INS’s pre-existing business modeland unlike traditional IPO’s, Insolar did not even need a proto-
type, never mind a worked-out business model, to receive ICO
funding. So, if Insolar aimed to produce a general blockchain
platform, a user-oriented focus would not have been appropriate.
However, taking a technology focus meant assuming the risk that
it would build a solution for which the market demand may not
materialize. The CPO stated as much:
Right now, we are meeting with customers and detailing use cases
with them. In fact, I would say we are obsessed with use cases. Having
said that, our initial solution wasn’t driven as much from use cases.
That’s kind of like what IBM did initially with Fabric.
Both Ethereum and Hyperledger Fabric are driven by tech-
nology institutions. Ethereum Foundation was led by their tech
visionary, Vitalik Buterin. For Fabric, IBM plays an important
role as the key sponsor for the initiative. In contrast, Corda and
Quorum development stemmed from speciﬁc needs of ﬁnancial
institutions. Based on its unique history, Insolar appears to have
blockchain development foci toward both business/user and the
technology .Note the emphasis placed on both as the Chief
Architect mentions:
It [insolar] was initially based on grocery experience of the founders.
But we found limits in current blockchain platforms, so we decided
to create our own better adapted to business requirements. But
otherwise, it started from scratch. No forks, all code written by
Insolar.
However, Insolar risked losing business needs focus while
it developed a general platform in the absence of a domain or
industry context. Fortunately, Insolar’s technical leaders under-
stood business domains. Its Chief Architect is a trained soft-
ware engineer who developed blockchain competency within
a banking setting, a rare happenstance at a time when most
blockchain startups’ technical experts like Buterin did not come
from corporate backgrounds [80]. With this formal training and
background, Insolar technical leads established a “disciplined
software engineering” approach.
Insolar primarily practices agile software development that
emphasizes responsiveness to changes or gaps in software re-
quirements, enabling teams to function even without full scope
of work visibility [81]. Agile development enables the Insolar
business team to gather requirements from enterprise customers
while the development team begins work on low-level protocol
functionality such as the consensus mechanism. Agility has also
been crucial for Insolar since it has already been through a key
vision expansion from focus on groceries to a general platform
and multiple conceptual designs.
Insolar also uses the Scrum28method within the agile process.
In Scrum [82], responsiveness is achieved via relatively short
iterations called “sprints” that take typically no more than a few
weeks to complete. Within each sprint, constant communication
maintains accountability and helps remove obstacles. At the end
of each sprint, a working deliverable that includes new features
decided upon at the beginning of the sprint is expected. Use
of the term “sprint” is ubiquitous within Insolar. According
28Taken from the notion of team members doing their assigned tasks within
a rugby scrum.
Authorized licensed use limited to: York University. Downloaded on August 12,2024 at 01:50:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KIM et al. : PERMISSIONLESS AND PERMISSIONED, TECHNOLOGY-FOCUSED AND BUSINESS NEEDS-DRIVEN 787
to the Project and Sales Director, one- or two-week mostly
noniterative sprints were integral for nearly all of the proofs-
of-concept that Insolar has developed for their customers. In
addition, the term was brought up by the CEO, Chief Architect,
and Head of Development Center at separate times. Insolar is
using development tools that are consistent with Scrum, namely
Jira for issue tracking and Conﬂuence for team collaboration
and wiki functionality. Additionally, via its GitHub repository,
Insolar provides a suite of tools for third-party developers to
contribute open source code to the Insolar codebase and de-
velop for-pay apps on the MainNet. Open source tools provided
include Jepsen, Golang language, and standard crypto library,
and Badger. Also, provided are API’s and some source code for
speciﬁc Insolar technical modules such as Assured Ledger and
XNS token speciﬁcations.
Following a disciplined approach, Insolar endeavored to use
and develop modular architectures , wherein domain-speciﬁc
software components are reused to mitigate the risk of changes
to requirements and save development time [83]. The Chief
Architect raised an interesting issue regarding this endeavor:
When you write non-blockchain code today, you usually do it
in a very modular way, but existing blockchain platforms are so
simplistic, you have minimal capabilities and tools to do a proper
modular approach. It is still very naive and in early stages. If you,
for instance, look at Fabric or Corda, the business code is exposed
to lots of low-level problems (leaky abstraction). A lot of software
issues arise due to the immature state of blockchain. For instance,
with non-blockchain you can write code without considering a lot
of low-level, extra modular processes, but that is not the case for
blockchain.
So whereas a technology focus does not appear inconsistent
with how Insolar applies Agile and Scrum methods, “immaturity
of technology” appears to hamper Insolar’s use of modular
architectures, which means that an efﬁcient means of writing
code to satisfy business needs is not accessible.
In the blockchain space, expectations that ventures use open
source software [84], providing “software transparency,” is com-
mon [85]. The core codebase for public networks like Ethereum
and Bitcoin as well as private networks developed using Hyper-
ledger Fabric are open-sourced, though speciﬁc private network
implementations will develop proprietary code from open code.
For public, permissionless networks, testnets serve as good
examples of open source code use.
Beyond traditional unit testing [86], there are special testing
needs for providing a blockchain platform. In 2019, as like
Ethereum, EOS, and others, Insolar launched its own testnet, as
a beta test for the roll-out of its MainNet in early 2020. Insolar’s
own nodes as well as trusted collaborators’ executed Insolar’s
open source code on their machines and provided decentralized
consensus for the testnet. Stakeholders and even the public
could view, run, modify, and (re)publish the code, making defect
detection more efﬁcient as multiple testers are deployed [87].
Arguably then, the blockchain codebase is more reusable than
for other types of enterprise software, which may appear to
contradict the Chief Architect’s lament about lack of modularity
for blockchain development. There is no contradiction as ouranalysis points to two types of reuse. There are general-use mod-
ules for consensus, token, and node management mechanisms,
for instance, and these are very reuseable. Even though Insolar
coded “from scratch” and was not able to truly leverage open
source for its preliminary development, now that its MainNet
codebase is open source, its stakeholders can more efﬁciently
develop apps or customize infrastructure, which should greatly
assist MainNet adoption. And testnets are means to leverage
the public aspect of the permissionless blockchain to source
widely and efﬁciently for testing. In contrast, what Insolar’s
Chief Architect sought was domain-dependent, not necessarily
open-source, modules at a higher level of abstraction, built upon
some domain assumptions and conventions particularly useful
for Insolar’s enterprise customers. And the state of such modules
is immature.
2) Discussion: In our analysis, we have identiﬁed four inter-
esting aspects of Insolar’s blockchain development process that
characterize its hybrid blockchain approach as follows.
1) Development foci on both the business needs driven use
cases for its private network customers and the technol-
ogy focus required to launch its public, permissionless
MainNet.
2) Disciplined software engineering required to maintain
both foci owing to what we posit is a unique organiza-
tional commitment to agility. Insolar’s leaders had verti-
cal management experience and technical competence in
enterprise software development at a time when very ICO
ventures did. We posit that such a balanced background
positively affected Insolar’s agility, whether in willingness
to change its business model or ability to ubiquitously
message importance of “sprints.”
3) Immaturity of technology is an aspect that makes main-
taining a business needs focus more challenging as it,
for instance, makes leveraging a modular architecture for
efﬁcient development more difﬁcult for private networks.
4) Software transparency is an aspect that makes maintaining
a technology focus less challenging as it allows Insolar to
provide open source that its MainNet stakeholders will
reuse leading to greater adoption of the platform. It also
allows for crowdsourcing to the public for MainNet testing
and maintenance.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this article, we conducted a multimethod qualitative study
entailing document analysis and analysis of interviews with
Insolar—an exemplar venture developing a hybrid blockchain
approach. We developed a framework that classiﬁes four types
that fall within the notion of hybrid blockchain as 1) hybrid
blockchain approach, 2) connected hybrid blockchain, 3) inter-
operable blockchain architecture, and 4) hard-forked blockchain
for enterprise use. We then identiﬁed key exemplar ventures from
each type and benchmark them along dimensions of 1) support
semantic modeling between private and public networks; 2) data
connectivity between networks; 3) support for syntactic interop-
erability between networks with heterogeneous codebases; 4)
governance model; and 5) technical features.
Authorized licensed use limited to: York University. Downloaded on August 12,2024 at 01:50:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
788 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 69, NO. 3, JUNE 2022
We found that there are no truly complete hybrid blockchain
ventures—i.e., those that fully support private and public net-
works, data interoperability, and heterogeneous networks as per
our criteria. Our article indicates that developing a compre-
hensive hybrid blockchain architecture is difﬁcult. Technical
sophistication to capably integrate two modes of consensus for
use in public and private networks is required. It also means
expending resources and bearing responsibility to maintain con-
nectivity between a venture’s public network and various private
networks, effectively requiring managing a platform that must
somehow properly incentivize a wide base of stakeholders from
online service providers, enterprise customers, to cryptocur-
rency holders.
We then examined Insolar’s blockchain development process
more in-depth via analysis of interviews with its managers. We
found that maintaining development foci—one, a technology-
focus on its public MainNet, and the other, a use case/business
needs-based focus on private networks—and having a disci-
plined software engineering approach were key for Insolar.
Moreover, we found immaturity of blockchain technology as
an impediment to the business needs-base focus, and software
transparency and open source software as helpful for the tech-
nology focus.
We noted Insolar’s willingness to pivot from developing a
platform for groceries to a general platform and servicing enter-
prise customers, and the blockchain development background
in corporate setting that its technical leads brought to a startup
when that was rare to ﬁnd in other such ventures. Though
the path that Insolar took has been extemporaneous, we posit
that its arguably idiosyncratic commitment to organizational
agility has been key to arriving where it has. Recall that the
challenge in interoperability initiatives has been reconciling the
disconnect between technology-focused and business needs-
focused approaches [25]. Insolar’s experiences from taking
both approaches may be useful for blockchain interoperability
providers: Commit to agility as an organization, whether that is
being open to thinking even more in terms of enterprise use cases
and business needs or hiring more people with corporate soft-
ware/blockchain development experience. Facebook explicitly
took this approach in its Libra initiative [88].
Though we addressed technology maturity as a factor that
provides a challenge for Insolar taking a business needs focus,
we did not address other aspects such as maturity of the IT or-
ganization and its business practices as well as IT strategy. Now
that we have characterized a phenomenon regarding blockchain
development, researchers may draw from research models from
Capability Maturity Model [8] as well as Stages Theory [89],
[90] to more rigorously pose research questions.
In addition, we offer an avenue for scholars to extend our
ﬁndings about the positive effect of software transparency on
blockchain development. Prior studies [91], [92] highlight us-
ability, informativeness, auditability, and accessibility of devel-
opment process information as several factors that can improve
software transparency. Most of these factors have been devel-
oped and tested before the boom of blockchain technology.
Future studies can assess the precise inﬂuence of each factor
on the perceived software transparency by users in the contextof hybrid blockchain initiatives and its ultimate impact on per-
formance benchmarks. Finally, future work could further delve
into the reasons for the hybrid blockchain trade-off. Inasmuch as
we observed and speculated upon this phenomenon, a rationale
informed from further theory development was beyond the
scope of this article and constitutes an opportunity for future
contribution.
APPENDIX
INTERVIEW QUESTIONS
Below is the list of the questions that were developed prior to
interviews. Since our interviews were semistructured, we asked
other ad-hoc questions depending on each individual interview
that may not be seen on this general a-priori list of questions.
Some of these ad-hoc questions were as follows:
1) Tell us about Insolar?
2) Tell us about yourself and what you do at Insolar?
3) Tell us why you joined Insolar?
4) Tell us what you think is so interesting about Insolar?
5) Tell us what how you think Insolar will become a big
success?
General
1) We have observed other blockchain projects exhibiting
a range of cultural values ranging from enterprise (e.g.,
IBM) to cypherpunk (e.g., Bitcoin and Ethereum) ethos.
Where do you think you fall on this spectrum?
2) Is there anything different in your opinion in a blockchain
project regarding requirements gathering?
3) Do you take into account suggestions or requirements
coming from token holders? Do token holders get to vote
like shareholders?
4) Connection and INS token. What is the relationship be-
tween Insolar’s products and the INS token?
5) What did you start with? How was the Insolar project
initiated?
Architecture
1) What difference, if any, does the existence of the INS token
make in architecting the system?
2) Are there any particular systems architecture concerns in
a blockchain project?
3) Are there any particular software architecture concerns in
a blockchain project?
Software Development Process
1) Do you believe that software process models are to be
taken strictly or literally—or are these models descriptive
of what is observed in the ﬁeld?
2) To what degree does your process resemble the waterfall
process?
3) To what degree does your process resemble a spiral
process?
4) To what degree does your process resemble an agile
process?
5) What do you use for project management tools?
6) Are there any special concerns when updating or upgrad-
ing the software running on the nodes—distributed system
that needs to stay in consensus.
Authorized licensed use limited to: York University. Downloaded on August 12,2024 at 01:50:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KIM et al. : PERMISSIONLESS AND PERMISSIONED, TECHNOLOGY-FOCUSED AND BUSINESS NEEDS-DRIVEN 789
Open Source
1) Are your code repos public?
2) What tools do you use for code versioning?
3) How many contributors?
4) Do you accept code and pull request from external
contributors?
Quality and Testing
1) Are there any software quality evaluation or metrics con-
cerns that are particular to blockchain projects?
2) Are there any software testing concerns that are particular
to blockchain projects?
3) Are there any system testing concerns that are particular
to distributed consensus systems?
Economics and Game Theory
1) To what degree does Game Theory enter into your engi-
neering process? Is it a major concern?
2) To what degree do token economics enter into your engi-
neering process? Is it a major concern?
3) Is there a separate group or process for developing the
token economics of your system? Any form engineering
involved in the token economics group?
REFERENCES
[1] “Blockchain technology and how it helps business growth,” Gartner.com,
Nov. 2019. Accessed Nov. 04, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.
gartner.com/en/information-technology/insights/blockchain
[2] S. Higgins, “Walmart, JD.com back blockchain food tracking effort in
China,” Coindesk, Dec. 2017.
[3] H. M. Kim and M. Laskowski, “Toward an ontology-driven blockchain
design for supply-chain provenance,” Intell. Syst. Accounting Finance
Manage. , vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 18–27, 2018, doi: 10.1002/isaf.1424 .
[4] S. Ibba, A. Pinna, M. I. Lunesu, M. Marchesi, and R. Tonelli, “Initial coin
offerings and agile practices,” Future Internet , vol. 10, Oct. 2018, Art. no.
103, doi: 10.3390/ﬁ10110103 .
[5] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” Bit-
coin.org, 2008. [Online]. Available: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf /angbracketright,A c -
cessed: Aug. 21, 2016.
[6] A. Narayanan and J. Clark, “Bitcoin’s academic pedigree,” Commun.
ACM , vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 36–45, Nov. 2017, doi: 10.1145/3132259 .
[7] J. G. Brodman and D. L. Johnson, “What small businesses and small
organizations say about the CMM,” in Proc. 16th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. ,
May 1994, pp. 331–340, doi: 10.1109/ICSE.1994.296795 .
[8] M. Paulk, “Capability maturity model for software,” in Encyclopedia of
Software Engineering (American Cancer Socety). Hoboken, NJ, USA:
Wiley, 2002.
[9] G. Sagirlar, B. Carminati, E. Ferrari, J. D. Sheehan, and E. Ragnoli,
“Hybrid-IoT: Hybrid blockchain architecture for Internet of Things—PoW
sub-blockchains,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Internet Things IEEE Green
Comput. Commun. IEEE Cyber, Phys. Social Comput. IEEE Smart Data ,
Jul. 2018, pp. 1007–1016, doi: 10.1109/Cybermatics_2018.2018.00189 .
[10] Z. Liu, S. Tang, S. S. M. Chow, Z. Liu, and Y . Long, “Fork-free hybrid
consensus with ﬂexible proof-of-activity,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst. ,
vol. 96, pp. 515–524, Jul. 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.future.2019.02.059 .
[11] S. Zhu, Z. Cai, H. Hu, Y . Li, and W. Li, “zkCrowd: A hybrid blockchain-
based crowdsourcing platform,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. , vol. 16, no. 6,
pp. 4196–4205, Jun. 2020.
[12] R. Hackett, “Ethereum: JPMorgan, microsoft, banks form blockchain
alliance,” Fortune, Feb. 2017.
[13] L. Kiffer, D. Levin, and A. Mislove, “Stick a fork in it: Ana-
lyzing the ethereum network partition,” in Proc. 16th ACM Work-
shop Hot Topics Netw. , New York, NY , USA, 2017, pp. 94–100, doi:
10.1145/3152434.3152449 .
[14] B. Warburg, How the Blockchain Will Radically Transform
the Economy . Banff, AB, Canada, 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://www.ted.com/talks/bettina_warburg_how_the_blockchain_will_
radically_transform_the_economy/[15] G. Giudici, S. Adhami, and S. Martinazzi, “Why do businesses go crypto?
An empirical analysis of initial coin offerings,” J. Econ. Bus. , vol. 100,
pp. 64–75, Nov./Dec. 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.jeconbus.2018.04.001 .
[16] G. Moore, “INS Closes $42M ICO for decentralized grocery delivery,”
Blockchain News, Dec. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.the-
blockchain.com/2017/12/27/ins-closes-42m-ico-decentralized-grocery-
delivery/
[17] ICODATA.io, Funds Raised in 2018, 2019. Accessed: May 23, 2019
[Online]. Available: https://www.icodata.io/stats/2018
[18] E. Androulaki et al. , “Hyperledger fabric: A distributed operating system
for permissioned blockchains,” in Proc. 13th EuroSys Conf. , vol. 30, New
York, NY , USA, 2018, pp. 1–30, doi: 10.1145/3190508.3190538 .
[19] M. Crosby, P. Pattanayak, S. Verma, and V . Kalyanaraman, “Blockchain
technology: Beyond Bitcoin,” Appl. Innov. Rev. , vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 5–20,
2016.
[20] M. Hearn, “Corda: A distributed ledger,” Corda.org, Technical White
Paper, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://docs.corda.net/ static/corda-
technical-whitepaper.pdf
[21] J. J. Roberts, “IBM-backed hyperledger releases fabric 1.0 for blockchain,”
Fortune, Jul. 2017.
[22] M. Laskowski, H. M. Kim, M. Zargham, M. Barlin, and D. Kabanov,
“Token economics in real-life: Cryptocurrency and incentives design for
Insolar’s blockchain network,” IEEE Comput ., Oct. 2019. Accessed: Nov.
04, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3465085
[23] B. Xu, D. Luthra, Z. Cole, and N. Blakely, “EOS: An architectural,
performance, and economic analysis,” Bitmex, Nov. 2018.
[24] “TRON: Advanced decentralized blockchain platform,” Dec. 2018. [On-
line]. Available: https://tron.network/static/doc/white_paper_v_2_0.pdf,
Accessed: Nov. 11, 2019.
[25] M. Lacity, Z. Steelman, and P. Cronan, “Towards blockchain 3.0 interop-
erability: Business and technical considerations,” BC CoE 2019-01, 2019.
[26] J. O. Kephart, T. Hogg, and B. A. Huberman, “Dynamics of computational
ecosystems,” Phys. Rev. A , vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 404–421, Jul. 1989, doi:
10.1103/PhysRevA.40.404 .
[27] J. Schöpfel, “Towards a Prague deﬁnition of grey literature,” in Proc. Conf.
Grey Literature: Transparency 2010 , Dec. 2010. [Online]. Available: https:
//archivesic.ccsd.cnrs.fr/sic_00581570, Accessed: Nov. 09, 2019.
[28] M. A. Khan, “Blockchain scaling—Sidechains!,” Medium, Jan. 2019.
[29] S. Ray, “What are sidechains?” Hackernoon, Jan. 2018.
[30] N. Acheson, “Hard fork vs soft fork,” CoinDesk, Mar 2018.
[31] J. Light, “The differences between a hard fork, a soft fork, and a chain
split, and what they mean for the future of Bitcoin,” Medium, Sep. 2017.
[32] S. Miah, “Interoperability in blockchain networks,” Hackernoon,
Aug. 2019.
[33] S. O’Neal, “Blockchain interoperability, explained,” Cointelegraph,
Sep. 2019.
[34] A. Munro, “Enterprise blockchain adoption is happening. Here’s why you
don’t see it,” Aergoblog, Jun. 2019. Accessed: Nov. 09, 2019. [Online].
Available: https://medium.com/aergo/enterprise-blockchain-adoption-is-
happening-b3a3cc0b0902
[35] “Smilo: Hybrid platform with a conscience,” smilo.io, White Paper,
Jan. 2019.
[36] S. Haber and W. S. Stornetta, “How to time-stamp a digital document,” in
Advances in Cryptology , Berlin, Germany, Springer, 1991, pp. 437–455,
doi:10.1007/3-540-38424-3_32 .
[37] D. Freuden, “Hybrid blockchain: The best of both chains,” Hackernoon,
Jun. 2018.
[38] M. Bartoletti and L. Pompianu, “An analysis of bitcoin OP_RETURN
metadata,” in Financial Cryptography and Data Security , Cham, Switzer-
land, Springer, 2017, pp. 218–230, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-70278-0_14 .
[39] F. Tschorsch and B. Scheuermann, “Bitcoin and beyond: A technical
survey on decentralized digital currencies,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tut. ,
vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 2084–2123, Jul./Sep. 2016.
[40] D. Yaga, P. Mell, N. Roby, and K. Scarfone, “Blockchain
technology overview,” National Inst. Standards Technol., NIST
Rep., NIST Internal or Interagency Rep. 8202, Oct. 2018. doi:
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8202 .
[41] W. Litwin, L. Mark, and N. Roussopoulos, “Interoperability of multiple
autonomous databases,” ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 267–293,
Sep. 1990, doi: 10.1145/96602.96608 .
[42] W. Litwin and A. Abdellatif, “Multidatabase interoperability,” IEEE Com-
put., vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 10–18, Dec. 1986.
[43] S. Melnik, Generic Interoperability Framework . Stanford, CA, USA:
Stanford Univ., 1999.
[44] G. Walsham, “Interpretive case studies in IS research: Nature and method,”
Eur. J. Inf. Syst. , vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 74–81, 1995.
Authorized licensed use limited to: York University. Downloaded on August 12,2024 at 01:50:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
790 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 69, NO. 3, JUNE 2022
[45] G. Walsham, “Doing interpretive research,” Eur. J. Inf. Syst. , vol. 15, no. 3,
pp. 320–330, 2006.
[46] R. K. Yin, Qualitative Research From Start to Finish . New York, NY , USA:
Guilford Publications, 2015.
[47] “The Grocery Store Reinvented,” INS Ecosystem, Nov. 2017. [Online].
Available: https://ins.cryptonomos.com/INS-ICO-Whitepaper.pdf
[48] “About Us,” Insolar, 2019. Accessed: Aug. 21, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://insolar.io/about
[49] D. Groombridge, “Blockchain Unraveled: What Succeeds and What
Doesn’t,” Gartner On-Demand, Gartner Group, Stamford, CT, USA,
2019.
[50] I. N. Zahid, Product Management: The Art and Science of Managing
Network and Communications Industry Products . Bloomington, IN, USA:
Xlibris Corporation, 2013.
[51] “Insolar technical paper,” Insolar, Jan. 2019. Accessed: Jul. 01, 2019. [On-
line]. Available: https://insolar.io/uploads/Insolar%20Tech%20Paper.pdf
[52] “Insolar economic paper,” Insolar, Jun. 2019. Accessed Jun. 30, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://insolar.io/uploads/Insolar%20Economic%
20Paper.pdf
[53] H. Performance and S. W. Group, “Hyperledger blockchain performance
metrics,” Linux Foundation, San Francisco, CA, USA, Oct. 2018. [Online].
Available: https://www.hyperledger.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/
HL_Whitepaper_Metrics_PDF_V1.01.pdf
[54] S. E. Sim, S. Easterbrook, and R. C. Holt, “Using benchmark-
ing to advance research: A challenge to software engineering,”
inProc. 25th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. , Washington, DC, USA,
2003, pp. 74–83. Accessed: Nov. 12, 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id
[55] T. T. A. Dinh, J. Wang, G. Chen, R. Liu, B. C. Ooi, and K.-L. Tan, “BLOCK-
BENCH: A framework for analyzing private blockchains,” in Proc. ACM
Int. Conf. Manage. Data , New York, NY , USA, 2017, pp. 1085–1100, doi:
10.1145/3035918.3064033 .
[56] C. Gorenﬂo, S. Lee, L. Golab, and S. Keshav, “FastFabric: Scaling hy-
perledger fabric to 20,000 transactions per second,” ArXiv190100910 Cs,
Mar. 2019. Accessed: Nov. 12, 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1901.00910
[57] P. Thakkar, S. Nathan, and B. Viswanathan, “Performance benchmarking
and optimizing hyperledger fabric blockchain platform,” in Proc. IEEE
26th Int. Symp. Modeling, Anal., Simul. Comput. Telecommun. Syst. ,S e p .
2018, pp. 264–276, doi: 10.1109/MASCOTS.2018.00034 .
[58] A. Baliga, I. Subhod, P. Kamat, and S. Chatterjee, “Performance evaluation
of the quorum blockchain platform,” ArXiv180903421 Cs, Jul. 2018.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1809.03421, Accessed: Nov. 11,
2019.
[59] “Aergo—The Blockchain for Business,” Apr. 2019. Accessed: Nov. 09,
2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.aergo.io
[60] L. Kan, Y . Wei, A. Haﬁz Muhammad, W. Siyuan, G. Linchao, and H.
Kai, “A multiple blockchains architecture on inter-blockchain communi-
cation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Softw Qual. , Rel. Secur. Companion ,
Jul. 2018, pp. 139–145, doi: 10.1109/QRS-C.2018.00037 .
[61] J. Kwan and E. Buchman, “Cosmos network—Internet of blockchains,”
Cosmos, 2019. Accessed: Nov. 18, 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
//cosmos.network
[62] “Evolve with Quorum. The proven blockchain solution for business,”
Quorum, Oct 2019. Accessed: Nov. 11, 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.goquorum.com/
[63] D. Williams, “Five learnings from a blockchain interoperability
hackathon,” EY Advisory, Apr. 2019.
[64] “Development plan and whitepaper,” VeChain, May 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://cdn.vechain.com/vechain_ico_ideas_of_
development_en.pdf
[65] T. Hardjono, A. Lipton, and A. Pentland, “Toward an interoperability archi-
tecture for blockchain autonomous systems,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage. ,
to be published. doi: 10.1109/TEM.2019.2920154 .
[66] B. Zhang and H. Balogun, “On the sustainability of blockchain funding,”
inProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining Workshops , Nov. 2018, pp. 89–96,
doi:10.1109/ICDMW.2018.00020 .
[67] G. Dorﬂeitner and C. Lung, “Cryptocurrencies from the perspective of
Euro investors: A re-examination of diversiﬁcation beneﬁts and a new
day-of-the-week effect,” J. Asset Manage. , vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 472–494,
Dec. 2018, doi: 10.1057/s41260-018-0093-8 .
[68] G. Agrawal, “Cosmos vs. polkadot,” Medium, Jul. 2019. Accessed: Nov.
19, 2019 [Online]. Available: https://medium.com/quiknode/cosmos-vs-
polkadot-3a06cd98f112[69] “Insolar Economic Paper,” Insolar, Jun. 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
//insolar.io/uploads/Insolar Economic Paper.pdf
[70] W. Li, S. Andreina, J.-M. Bohli, and G. Karame, Securing Proof-
of-Stake Blockchain Protocols . Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2017,
pp. 297–315.
[71] I. Team, “Insolar consensus algorithms: Achieving >10k tx/s,” Medium,
Mar. 2019.
[72] H. Park, “What you need to know about the Aergo main-
net launch,” Medium, Mar. 2019. Accessed: Nov. 20, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://medium.com/aergo/what-you-need-to-know-
about-the-aergo-mainnet-launch-88cb1fab6773
[73] K. Ero˘ glu, “Menapay blockchain tests: Quorum TPS,” Medium, Sep. 2018.
Accessed: Nov. 20, 2019 [Online]. Available: https://medium.com/
menapay/menapay-blockchain-tests-quorum-tps-8aac5f51820b
[74] “Aergo Project Review | WhitePaperTrail | Reviews, analysis and ratings,”
WhitePaperTrail | Simple and concise blockchain project reviews, analysis
and ratings, Sever, Jul. 2019. Accessed: Nov. 20, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://whitepapertrail.com/aergo-project-review/
[75] “Validators Overview | Cosmos SDK Documentation,” Cosmos, 2019.
Accessed: Nov. 20, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://cosmos.network/
docs/cosmos-hub/validators/overview.html#introduction
[76] “Everything you need to know about VeChain Nodes and Node re-
wards | VeChainInsider.com,” VeChainInsider, Mar. 2018. Accessed: Nov.
20, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://vechaininsider.com/guides/guide-
to-vechain-nodes-and-node-rewards/
[77] X. Xu et al. , “A taxonomy of blockchain-based systems for architecture de-
sign,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Softw. Architecture , Apr. 2017, pp. 243–252,
doi:10.1109/ICSA.2017.33 .
[78] L. Lamport, R. Shostak, and M. Pease, “The byzantine generals problem,”
ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. , vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 382–401, 1982.
[79] A. de Rocha, “The Insolar case: Why using a single consensus may
not make sense anymore?” Medium, Sep. 2019. Accessed: Nov. 20,
2019. [Online]. Available: https://medium.com/coinmonks/the-insolar-
case-why-using-a-single-consensus-may-not-make-sense-anymore-
949871cd29a9
[80] Q. DuPont, “Experiments in algorithmic governance: A history and
ethnography of ‘The DAO,’ a failed decentralized autonomous organiza-
tion,” in Bitcoin and Beyond: Cryptocurrencies, Blockchains and Global
Governance , M. Campbell-Verduyn, Ed. R. Publishing, Routledge at
London, UK, 2018.
[81] S. Nerur, R. Mahapatra, and G. Mangalaraj, “Challenges of migrating to
agile methodologies,” Commun. ACM , vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 72–78, May 2005,
doi:10.1145/1060710.1060712 .
[82] L. Rising and N. S. Janoff, “The Scrum software development process
for small teams,” IEEE Softw. , vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 26–32, Jul. 2000, doi:
10.1109/52.854065 .
[83] I. Jacobson, M. Griss, and P. Jonsson, Software Reuse: Architecture,
Process, and Organization for Business Success . Boston, MA, USA:
Addison-Wesley, 1997.
[84] E. von Hippel and G. Krogh, “Open source software and the ‘private-
collective’ innovation model: Issues for organization science,” Org. Sci. ,
vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 209–223, Apr. 2003, doi: 10.1287/orsc.14.2.209.
14992 .
[85] S. Porru, A. Pinna, M. Marchesi, and R. Tonelli, “Blockchain-oriented
software engineering: Challenges and new directions,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM
39th Int. Conf. Softw. Eng. Companion , May 2017, pp. 169–171, doi:
10.1109/ICSE-C.2017.142 .
[86] D. M. Raﬁ, K. R. K. Moses, K. Petersen, and M. V . Mäntylä, “Beneﬁts
and limitations of automated software testing: Systematic literature review
and practitioner survey,” in Proc. 7th Int. Workshop Automat. Softw. Test ,
Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2012, pp. 36–42, [Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.
org/citation.cfm?id, Accessed: Nov. 16, 2019.
[87] E. Raymond, “The cathedral and the bazaar,” Knowl. Technol. Policy ,
vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 23–49, Sep. 1999, doi: 10.1007/s12130-999-1026-0 .
[88] Z. Seward, “More details emerge on team behind facebook’s secretive
blockchain,” CoinDesk, New York, NY , USA, Jun. 2019.
[89] L. C. Seong, K. B. Wan, Y . E. Jung, and P. M. Ho, “Information technology
maturity stages and enterprise benchmarking: An empirical study,” Ind.
Manage. Data Syst. , vol. 108, no. 9, pp. 1200–1218, Jan. 2008, doi:
10.1108/02635570810914892 .
[90] J. Karimi, Y . P. Gupta, and T. M. Somers, “Impact of competitive strategy
and information technology maturity on ﬁrms’ strategic response to glob-
alization,” J. Manage. Inf. Syst. , vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 55–88, Mar. 1996, doi:
10.1080/07421222.1996.11518101 .
Authorized licensed use limited to: York University. Downloaded on August 12,2024 at 01:50:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
KIM et al. : PERMISSIONLESS AND PERMISSIONED, TECHNOLOGY-FOCUSED AND BUSINESS NEEDS-DRIVEN 791
[91] M. Shaikh and E. Vaast, “Folding and unfolding: Balancing openness and
transparency in open source communities,” Inf. Syst. Res. , vol. 27, no. 4,
pp. 813–833, Sep. 2016, doi: 10.1287/isre.2016.0646 .
[92] J. C. S. do Prado Leite and C. Cappelli, “Software transparency,” Bus. Inf.
Syst. Eng. , vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 127–139, Jun. 2010, doi: 10.1007/s12599-
010-0102-z .
Henry M. Kim (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in industrial engi-
neering from the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
He is an Associate Professor with the Schulich School of Business, York
University, Toronto, ON, Canada, and the Director with the blockchain.lab,
York University. He has written extensively on blockchain, authored more than
25 blockchain-related papers in venues such as IEEE Journals and Frontiers in
Blockchain.
Dr. Kim serves as a Senior Research Advisor for several blockchain startups
and coorganized the 2nd IEEE Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrencies.
Hjalmar Turesson was born in Helsingborg, Sweden. He received the B.Sc.
degree in biology from Lund University, Lund, Sweden, the M.Sc. degree in
behavioral and neural sciences from the University of Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany, and the Ph.D. degree in neuroscience from Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ, USA.
He is currently a Teacher of AI with Schulich School of Business, York
University, Canada, Toronto, ON, Canada.Marek Laskowski received the Ph.D. degree in computer engineering from the
University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
He serves as a Senior Research Scientist with BlockScience and is a Co-
Founder of blockchain.lab and Toronto Blockchain Week. He also advises
several blockchain startups as well as UN/CEFACT. His work on multiagent
modeling of complex healthcare systems was cited by the US Centers for Disease
Control with the University of Manitoba.
Amir Fard Bahreini received the bachelor’s degree in accounting from Shiraz
University, Shiraz, Iran, the MBA and M.Sc. degrees from the University of
Oklahoma, Norman, OK, USA. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree
in management information systems with the University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
His research interest includes information security decision-making.
Authorized licensed use limited to: York University. Downloaded on August 12,2024 at 01:50:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
